Dizaster vs DNA Lyrics

[Round 1 - Dizaster]
You American faggot! Now after all the talk, about how you would show up and never back out
Drake offered to put 3 grands on this battle, to judge it
And you fucking backed out
Yeah you little fucking pussy
I'm in front of DNA, wow! No fucking way!
This gotta be my lucky day. I'm about to tie him to leash in case he tries to fucking run away
Yeah! The problem with you kids is that you lack respect
But fuck me over on money right now and try to run out and I'ma snap your neck
Cause people know
That backing out of battles is not part of my plans
But you and Cortez always lie so not to my surprise, all your alibis came as a bunch of unauthorized scams
Shit even if I met you in the middle of the East
You find a way to say that I ran
But I'm from Los Angeles, I'm proud to say that that's my land
In L.A we support our home teams, we got a lot of pride
But Goddamn, the way you ducked me in LA proves you'll always be more of a fan of the Dodgers than I am!
You soft as hell, I'm not going to lie, fam'
In your battle with Rex, you almost copped a right hand from Dot Mobb's hopping hypeman
When Rex made fun of your retarded mother
I know you wanted to fight man
But then they called the cameras off
And you walked off and called it a night, damn
Sorta like when Eminem told you "Lose yourself in the moment, you only get one shot in a life span"
And you answered him like "I know Slim, that's exactly why I'm gonna walk away from this mic stand!"
Your boy Cortez act on some G-shit
We were supposed to battle here he backed out
Like "I need more cash now" and that is some weak shit
He's a sneaky latino
So I wasn't surprised when I came to find out that he skipped
He was already flaking like a tortilla, so soon as I saw the guacamole on the side with the green chips
I knew it was only right that that bean dipped
It don't matter what battling league you actually be with
If you gon' be dumb enough to bite the hand that you eat with
At least be smart enough to cover up your tracks
And don't leave prints
Someone call up Smack and tell them to cancel the field trip
Straps with the beams equipped
Like an active Marine ready to damage your queenship
Shells battering, the cannon ring
Until half of your team is sea sick
The other half starts abandoning ship, panic and leap quick
In the same fashion that Hollow took his first chance to get green quick, turned his back on GT, packed up his bags took the cash and then he split
And the faggot hasn't been seen since
It's all a story that correlates if you go back and read script
I use this all as a scenario to reference the battling scene with
Cause GrindTime is the ship
And this is bad as the Titanic sea gets
Cause without Smack you wouldn't be shit
But lost talent stranded across the Atlantic sea
Without a raft to compete with
I got the long nose like X-factor
I'll make the back of your jeep flip
I said you'd think we were playing Xbox together the way I left half of your screen split
My guns are barely legal
With magazines that'll make this teen strip
That's how you like it right? Come back with a clean flip
Yeah, I'm ready for the drama, ain't no question marks
I'll rip your flesh apart like Jeffrey Dahmer
Let's get it popping I'll take the beef and steady chop it
Like a chef from Benihana
Speaking of chefs, shouts out to Cortez's mamma
Cause I heard every GrandTime East Coast event she be fixing Poison Pen's empanadas
Speaking of him, you'd have to pick up the phone and ? call ya
Cause you too busy slumped over in the bed with Hoffa
Holding hands with Hollow
And we all know you (?) by Dutch Vega and Sara Kana
What's the beef between us? It's been a never ending saga
I'll leave you walking around with Bender's suppressed persona when I Sketch Menace your necklace off ya
? deadly waters
I'll throw your body on the stretcher and let the chopper off -*Gun Noises* and drop your paramedic helicopter
I do this for my fans, you motherfuckers ain't shit to me
Are y'all kidding me? I'm fucking bum rushing the enemy
These knuckles will leave you buckling instantly
I fucking get timid and start punching you viciously
Uppercuts will leave your stomach in misery
Like muscular dystrohpy
That's for thinking you can come online publically dissing me
You can pop your fists while I'm still crushing you physically
This shit is child's play
You get ate side ways like the number infinity
I said, you need artist development before you come on the blog and then mention me
I'll stomp you out and make you a part of this history
Don't show me that cause this is about to be the bodybag of the century! Hold on! Hold on!
You motherfuckers ain't shit to me
They say karma's a bitch, for you it's probably dentistry
Because the part of your mouth that's missing
Is only a reflection, of what's scarring you mentally
So the gap, so the gap between your teeth exists merely as an object of imagery to distract you from the real gap between us and that's bars and delivery!

[Round 1 - DNA]
November 5th, it's ironic
You know my father died on this day
And I can still remember him telling me
"Son, say what you mean, and mean what you say"
See I'm only 20 Diz, so in my past battles my emotions might have got carried away
That's why I flew here to Canada
To make sure that won't happen today
So when I grip the nine, rip your spine, make your body rewind
Man I don't mean that shit
I'll probably never clap the shit out you
But trust I mean every word when I say
"I'll smack the shit out you!"
The difference between entertainment and real life
Like remember when I said I'll fuck you up in Vegas?
Well, depending on how this battle goes I still might
Cause see? I still might
Move back, move back, what are you doing?
Getting in my face trying to go crazy trying to fuck me up when it's dead time
When Drake's here in front of the battle
But you ain't gon' make none of his headlines
What I was trying to say was
That the difference between entertainment and real life
Like remember when I said I'd fuck you up in Vegas
Well, depending on how this battle goes I still might
Cause me missing a tooth only means I've been in a real fight and got real stripes
So until you get tapped with a sucker punch and missing yours from an uppercut, then you know what this feels like
I took this battle for YouTube views, promotion and fanbase
So I made sure I'm well prepared
Knowing my name would be buzzing in Sweden, China, Switzerland, making them well aware
So once I get rid of this storm, and y'all see the weather clear
Just think about the end of every other natural disaster
You gone see DNA everywhere
Remember against A-Class? When y'all was supposed to go 60 seconds then on the day of the battle this guy switched it?
Then remember against Swave you had timed rounds but he said fuck it and you wound up rhyming for 9 minutes?
Then against me this guy told Lush I'm rhyming 'til I'm finished Which only proves further you got a problem with time limits
See you the snake that's trying to hide your rattle
Which only shows the Canadian Quarter ain't the only bitch that flips when it's time to battle
And that's when I realized, hmm
You really got a problem with time
Like when you say you're a terrorist and a hijacker
I'm not getting it. Cause if you detonate a bomb what you gon' set the time to? Unlimited?
You really got a problem with time
I discovered something Diz while I was watching your battles
And nigga, you have never wore a watch in your battles
You really have a problem with time
It's not opinion no more, it's a fact, nigga
You do ? lunchbreaks?
Change times whenever you want with your hat to the back
What the fuck you think you now? Black, nigga?
Y'all all know, we really got a problem with time
But fuck that, for the last two years
You've been giving me the runaround
I managed to stay relevant
With every battle reaching over 200 thou'
You done the same but your music's trash
So the industry will never love your style
Which makes you a earthquake, cause you always gone be a disaster that remains underground
See you just an entertainer, Diz
In other words a fucking gimmick
And it's for so long that the delivery
Can mask those fucking lyrics
Your rhymes are put together sloppy and unorganized
That's why besides GrindTime we ain't fucking with it
So battling DNA will be the first time his verses have structure in it
So when you spit all aggressive with conviction
I be thinking that you actually mad
And then understand why you hate us New York niggas
Cause he drive us around all the time in Taxi Cabs
Like his rap battle D, he's supposed to be the big bad Dizaster
And when I see DNA, I'ma shoot him and let the 5th clap ya
I said "Dizaster, let's fight" he said "cool, I'ma bitch slap ya"
Soon as he hopped out the cab all you hear on the radio is "Dizaster it's your dispatcher
Please go pick up Plex Rock and Lush One
And stay away from DNA you know you don't bust guns
You never touched drugs a day in your life or touched none
And hurry up your mom's calling, rents due, you must come"
So when you squint your fucking eyebrows
And spit with alllll that aggression
I almost think you might really bust your Glock
But then again we saw him against Arsonal
And you ain't look too good with that fucking shot
You gon' try to rebuttal everything I say
Don't act like you fucking not
But it's cool cause a good rebuttal only means I had to say something hot
So don't be confused when he rebuttal every lyric I say
And think he's clever with frees
Cause every time y'all cheer for that great rebuttal
You only giving credit to me

[Round 2 - Dizaster]
Man, DNA, you are so fucking hood
I'm gonna rebuttal everything you say?
Goddamn it, I didn't even know I was that good
Shit but fuck it, since he wants to talk about time
Then we'll talk about time
When I roll up outside and hurt ya
But you're DNA you never click clack the burner
You never commit the murder
See I do what I want with the time limits
I'll just extend them further
This world's mine I control time
That's why they call me the Prince of Persia
But you wanna rebuttal too
I mean you rebuttal your missing tooth
But that's not even a rebuttal topic
I mean, you wanna rebuttal a missing tooth then make a CD, put out some music, get some money off it
Wait 'til at least you have one deposit, go to your fucking dentist office, write him a cheque with a fucking number on it
And if it makes you feel any better about the situation
You can write the word 'rebuttal' on it
Homie listen, it's been since day one I ain't liking you dude
We can go outside right now and I'm fighting you too
It ain't about punchlines, DNA
I'll just display how I'm a better writer than you
So stop talking, pay homage, I'm spitting
I solve problems, I'm an awesome magician
This street magic, I'll make your beef vanish like hot pockets cause all of you chicken
I wanna squab with him, but if your squad is honestly tripping
That car stopping, that Glock popping your top open
Like top ramen before you spark the ignition
I start boxing, Bernard Hopkins
Your heart stopping; Chris Farley condition
(?) in an arm bar, caught in submisison
Now you lost in the mix, got a bunch of hostages with him
He tried hopping the fence, it's an impossible mission
I'm camouflaged in the trenches
Ready to penetrate your army's defences
With these binocular lenses I have a prophet's vision
Is that the hardest kid in your clique? I got a problem with it
Cause I'm the motherfucker, I'm what your role model isn't
I'm the armed technician here to remodel your kitchen
With a bomb in it, the islamic condition
Part of your crib gone with the wind
Shards of you missing carving your rib
Disarm the opposition
Then plant the pipe bomb in the car engine and have Queen Latifah set it off from the distance
My job description: I split wigs like a salon beautician
That .38 is Special like your mom's condition
I know y'all have a problem with the retard jokes, but I only use them cause he has something in common with them
Cause when he says he's flipping to mingle and he's letting the machete spray, it's not hard for us to see the retarded in him
I don't give a fuck if y'all wanna donate to autism
The truth is... cover your ears Bishop. The truth is your mom's not even a good example of what being handicapped's about
Cause she's a master at that wheelchair
In that I wouldn't have a doubt
Most people getting around when they're disabled
They find it hard and you live in a massive house
But she uses the fucking hallways as interstate freeways, where she gets off at the nearest living room exit
So she can take the fastest route
Weaving in and out of furniture traffic
She doesn't even scratch the couch
But she's kinda like you in a sense cause whenever she's stuck in a corner she's really good at backing out
Stop touching me! Y'all gon' make a rapping discovery
I don't even know how I can battle you so comfortably
I still can't even believe this faggot's in front of me
Everyday I wake up
And I hit a blunt before I even wash my face up
Then I think about your genetic make up
And how we can make up such a fake fuck
You pussy ? you're getting duct taped up
I'll kill every faggot in your city, I'll even fuck Mase up
? now, your on a one way truck
About to get ran the fuck over over by a fucking one way truck
You little fucking pussy, your face is vaginal
Your mouth is like a vagina and in the center it has a hole
But fuck a camel though, you have enamel toe
It's Dizaster, you know I act like a crude jerk
Your attitude is past faggot dude
You got a gap in your tooth gagged and you yapped on your new shirt in your battle with Tsu Surf
I react, I'm rolling fast, I let the tool burst
Kids will get hit in ass like the back of a Vatican school church
I take stacks off packages, this faggot don't move work
The only cleaning his gap out is the only time he digs up or actually do dirt
Two thirds of his life has been a root canal
Conceited influenced you in style
Everything you about to do he happened to do first
The foundation is missing like the roof of your mouth
That is what you worth
I would slap this dude around
But the fact is life is already battling you worse
And that is reality I know it's sad, but the tooth hurts

[Round 2 - DNA]
Diz, you ain't say one thing hot
You still ain't say the fucking truth
I've been in about 18 battles
And he still gone mention my fucking tooth
And y'all gone cheer cause you think it's nice people
But that's wack cause its shit likes to go to the gap
Like white people
So why you gon' keep freestyling acting like you gettin' it
Diz, you ain't ripping it
Even your hat knows I'm gonna win
Cause it's like Cleveland, you gone lose in the end
Then you wanted to mention my mom being disabled
That's why I hate that you rap, B
You just ? placed in your rap, D
My teeth is missing and I got a face full of acne
When that steel flare, I bet all of these fans will cheer like Drake in Degrassi
People are rapping, you must be kidding me
I'll do you like Pun, have you dead in the middle of little Italy
Thinking you can spit wit' me, you ain't hot as humidity
So why would y'all give him props
For mention my mom with a disability
I'll go to your mom's house come through smack her hard
Come through see her right quick then I snatch that broad
Catch her right in the kitchen while she's eating caviar
And put that bitch in a wheelchair out the blue like the Avatar
And this the point, see something something
You think that you so nice you little old clown
You rebuttal half lines
I damn near just rebuttalled your whole round
This the point where I pin you down
And have Organik hold you
Beat the shit outta you
Like your Pops did when he disowned you
Give you the same treatment
That you did every time you was disloyal
But wait, before I do all that I'ma expose you
Remember what you told Organik about King of the Dot?
"Your league is fucking shitty bro'
If you ain't gonna give us the help in promotion and getting dough, then why the fuck you attack our logos against your bitch ass videos?
Fuck King of the Dot, we technically invented you
GrindTime's the prototype, we do what you pretend to do
I will never respect this chump"
Now you over here 2 years later? I guess time flies loud
Cause if you ain't notice
King of the Dot is shitting on Grind Time Now
And your last 3 battles been in Canada
So this league basically made you bitch!
And you disrespected them in a battle? You ungrateful bitch!
You a faggot, I'm just tryna figure out what made you switch!
I guess Grind Time held you down and then raped you bitch!
I couldn't wait to get in your face to tell you I hate you bitch!
Flew all the way Canada
To put you in a wheelchair; Drake you bitch!
? bitch!
They said DNA fell off, now I'm back, thank you, bitch!
But how's his Pop rich and you say you struggle dummy?
You take battles for free but gotta pay bills?
I guess you don't care about no fucking money
For a couple of pennies he'll be ready to travel
So it makes sense when you ate that sandwich vs SMP
Cause that's the only time you had bread in a battle
Then you disrespected Jin and he whole race
But I bet you if you seen him you'd probably switch sides
And dick ride and be pole dancing
You whine and cry about every battle, I bet you have a fit that you don't get your way at your folks' mansion
So it makes sense why you hate Asians
Cause you always throw Tantrums
And everybody knows that battle vs Locksmith
That one counted
Cause you showed you hated Asians more cause when you choked you looked Dumfoundead
But if that's too low then turn the volume on your speakers up
Your rhymes is weak as fuck
Like the last time Redman and Method Man tried teaming up
And when he said that line vs Swave
At first I was like "woooh, damn that's hot!"
Until Method Man co-signed you and you just disrespected a legend who gave you props
And then if you talking like that then of course he's fronting
There ain't a course, I get him off for nothing
This battle's six days after Halloween
It's ironic, cause he already lost to Pumpkin
And he said in the MC book, when you fuck up you keep going
And in the eyebrow book
You keep shaving if they keep growing
Cause I'ma keep it a hundred
My tooth's missing and them eyebrows is real bushy
So King of the Dot, let's keep it a hundred
One of us is lying saying we get pussy
When I run up on Dizaster in New York with a Knick's hoodie
He'll back down and get scared and get mushy
Okay I lied, I see one of us does get pussy
But why do you keep on talking
When you act like you know you off the heat?
Me right now nigga please, I'm off the beat
I'll take your body off the concrete and throw it off the street
You got that dog chain on right now
But I'm the one that's off the leash
So why you keep rapping like you be rapping when it's dope
You a faggot, I'll clap it, then jack it like your coat
You told Swave you pop the nine, show him like Columbine
You think that you blood, stop at five
They brought this yellow tape here
Cause Organik knew it was a homicide
So don't act like your raps is hot or you'll blast the Glock
Time's about to run out, you can have your knot
You have a problem with time so you don't know how to stop on time when your raps is hot
But this Caliente will make you die before the Aftershock

[Round 3 - Dizaster]
You dissed me about the Canada shit trying to snatch my props
I think it's funny how you have to mention Caliente and Aftershock so you can ride King of the Dot's cock
That's how you fucking get around homie, homie I'll stomp you
The only reason, fucking, you mentioned Drake in Degrassi because he reminds you of your Mom too
I'm basically nasty
There's a couple of questions my fans have been waiting to ask me
Does she really look like Drake from Degrassi?
Is Cortez really on the sideline raking the grass leaves
You fucking...you wanna get paid more guap now, you wanna get paid like an athlete
But you're on lockout cause you stay in a rap league that only caters to Math's needs
When you left your Grind Time family you disappointed them
You made them regret the fact they ever let you join with them
No one forced you off the boat bitch it was your choice to swim
Now the only thing you'll ever ever have in common with Poison Pen, is the fact that you'll never be boys again
You know what else rhymes with Poison Pen?
Umm, I don't know, "backstabbing disloyal friend"?
When you say "bars over jokes" why you gon' pretend?
You don't truly believe bars are better than jokes
You're not keeping it a hundred and ten
Cause you switch it up to comedy too, I always hear laughter when your punches come to an end
Especially when you spit your gun bars, we all think you're the funniest then
I mean, come on dawg you really can't fucking rap with me
I can go off the fucking top and this whole thing will become a tragedy
Yeah motherfucker, you ain't wanna be the man right now
You fucking can't even see me, you can't even stand right now
But I take care of my shit and I can fucking kill you all
Yeah you little fucking pussy, I don't feel you all
But since I'ma change up on this topic, cause I'ma kill it tonight
I'ma touch up on a topic about why you lie, and everybody's gonna feel it, aight?
This is a topic I wasn't gonna illustrate tonight
I think most of the time your brains wouldn't be able to comply
But I figured y'all smarter generation are educated and figured I wouldn't be afraid to try
See mainstream is a bunch of manipulation in disguise
They blindfold you from the real truth, to distract you from a database they hide
Charles Darwin is a faggot who thinks we came from evolution and later on we changed in size in a different phase in time
What I'm trying to say to you is why would you believe in that and the Bible, those are all fairy tales, goodbye
Cause the truth of our genetics is written in the ancient scribe
Our bloodline was given to us from aliens that came from spaceships in the sky
Now you're wondering why I'm saying this, it's cause based on his name I can relate it to this guy
It's all reality based, it's all in this equation still applies
Cause based on reality, everything ever said that was about DNA has been a lie
I'm embarrassing y'all lames
I'm eviscerating your jaw and I'm tearing your small frame
Ripping your fucking heart out and leaving it there in the car lane you st-st-st-stuttered when you tried to mention that dog chain
You stupid fuck, you have terrible blog game
Yeah and motherfucker the "true stories" you're supposedly telling, they're lies and they're basically all lame
DNA hears a story one way, when it comes out of his mouth it apparently got
Changed
So you're not DNA, they gave you the wrong name
You should change your name into the American Arcane
DNA, Yo I'm DNA, Hold on! Hold on!
"Now I'ma roll up and I'ma come with the 5's and the 6 and the 7's
Now when I go from 8, 9 and 10, that'll mean you get hit with 11"
That's what you sound like, "A, B, C, D, E, F, G
It's always the same thing, if I bodied Rone and Rone bodied Okwerdz then what does that make me?"
Shut the fuck up! Alright?
You're just an undercard to the main star actors
What you gonna do now that Smack don't wanna pay off none of these maincard rappers?
What you gonna do now, huh? Do like you did in Oun P and spit your little gay bars backwards?
What you gonna do? Race me in a race track in a race car backwards?
What you gonna do? Come with the metal after you summon the devil from listening to a Lil Wayne song backwards?
What you gonna do? You wanna play that stupid little fucking game then game on faggot
I'll leave your little brain all trapped inside one of your own little gay 8 bar patterns like "Go ahead DNA, flip the word radar backwards"
"Hold on, hold on I can do it, hold on
So when I roll up with the AR and I spray off clappers
That'll be the result of this battle if you spell the word radar backwards...wait a minute, radar.. that's still the same bar backwards!
Hold on, hold on! Now when I roll up with the ? and I spray off clappers
That'll be the result of this battle if you spell the word radar backwards..
Goddamn it, it's still radar backwards"
Truth is, I'll break it down for y'all since your boy Cortez, aka José, won't explain this stuff
I was on the cell all day trying to set up this who thing with Lush
While you in the background with him doing roleplay on the phone hanging up
You think playing with my money is funny I'll blow this location up
And I won't leave until I make sure your face gets crushed
Add more flame, I turn your torso and face to dust
More flame, the propane take your soul raise it up
I'll leave you fucking clothes ? in your skull breaking up and dislocating your shoulder bone from your rotator cuff
You smile like you don't use Colgate enough
Every couple of seconds when you're rapping your nose face gets touched like your trying to point the way your cocaine is stuck or your just another faggot actor who thinks he's soul mates with Lux
But Lux is the man... syke, you're both gay as fuck!
I'll rip Hollows hand off while its still attached to his foam paper cup
It was like six in the morning
I saw you and your little sister Jennifer Cortez sit on the corner, holding up a sign that said for food we're willing to sit on a boner polish a ball sack and suck dick for a quarter and underneath it said please all we had for dinner was yoghurt
Your little Smack gimmick image here literally won't work
I bet Math used to punk you and make you finish his homework
This kid is like Conceited, except he ended up hitting his growth spurt
Your boy Murder Ave doesn't even exist, it's not even a known turf
You guys are both nomads the only home this ho has is literally his own shirt
Look at you rubbing yourself trying to keep your composure
You ran away fucking Smack because the events they had were bigger and doper
Always bitching that Grind Time couldn't give you exposure
So you walked around for like 6 months with a chip on your shoulder
Before you decided to jump ship, hoping to get you a little bit closer
But swiffed out on our interest cause you were the diva that was tipping it over
And the sad part is all Smack had to do to bribe you was promise to put some new rims on your stroller
They offered Cortez a new fisherman boat so he doesn't have to swim to the border and Hollow Da Don got a brand new Nintendo controller
People always said your boy Cortez looked like Pitbull
And even though he's the same identical poser, now I believe he's a pitbull since I seen him switch up on his owners
Listen here bitch, you have a listening disorder
Your mission is officially over if you think you gon' beat me I'd rather hire Jin as my chauffeur
Yeah, I'm a F15 engine versus a 1960 Corolla and you're missing your motor
I'll run up in your crib wit' them soldiers while you're sipping a soda
Catch you slipping, put you in submission and fold ya
Then jump up and put my kicks on your sofa like Tom Cruise did to Oprah, yeah
What's going on pussy?
It looks like that type of shit you cannot respond to
You said on the track 1.25 seconds on your song about your Dad gone that you never clapped a revolver
Yeah, remember? 1 minute 25 seconds you looked up to the light
And screamed out I've never touched a drug or busted a gun in my life
You never clapped a revolver, I'll flat-line you snipe at your heart like the final boss you battle in Contra
So act like Manic, so act like Manic, I'll pop ya
Give me that deadly stare I'll let it air leaving shells everywhere like Italian pasta
You roll with a pack of imposters
You don't wanna scrap I'll pull a Mac and I'll (sock at ya bitch?) slapped with the impact of A-Class crashing his Honda
I'll strike you, I'll strike you faster than the Black African Mamba and send your body bag back to Rwanda
Battling me is worse off than sharing a bath tub with Blanka or getting a back rub massage from Mortal Kombat's Baraka
Your breath smells like asshole and cacka
You need to grab some Binaca
I'll backhand you and I will damage ya Chakra
The day you beat me is the day everyone in Canada considers Sno an actual Rasta
What you know about, What you know about weed, your whole life you probably only seen 2 bags of ganja
I'm a Youtube superstar, everyday I have new fans from Deutchland to Jakarta
From buktan to Combala, Domican Republic, and yucads in cabanas
? all of them ? sri lanka down to Sudan and Uganda but all you have is 2 fans, you're Kitana
I saw you wearing earrings that one day, fake ass shits
Put on, probably put on, start wearing Prada
Instead of fucking worrying about what you wear you should try and disply some honour
You scared to come to California afraid I'll put them great gangstas on ya
But every time you rap it's about how you bang your llamas and how you give my brain caps and you be making trauma
And how your homies rolled around Vegas and shut the whole baby down and start creating drama but that doesn't make you crazy that makes you like QP's baby momma
You never shot a gun in your life like you said....yeah
And that's the reason why I'm having major problems with the way you were brought up but it ain't your fault that's why I blame Madonna
Come on dawg let's kick some facts and just be honest, huh?
You went to Smack put up a stack and you peed on it
And that is a fact I ain't gotta actually speak on it far as your facebook statuses, the average is 3 comments
You leave today with a stash in your jeans pocket, then I'm smacking that green off it
You went to Smack got jacked for your bread and didn't? demolish you're average at best and to add to that threat this MC's polished
Fuck what this faggot just said I rapidly clap with that lead and rip a patch up the back of your head like Rasheed Wallace
Your Mom's fucking retard I mean it!
But it's not the same cause she's also a genius
She gives a lot of brain she's a quadriplegic
I don't give a fuck about her eating problems
She can exercise some different feeding options
She can't use her hands they shake, so if she wants to have some steak she puts the knife between her toes and uses her retarded feet to chop them
But no matter how good she gets at holding the silverware she always seems to drop them
And then stands back looking at 'em like, "If only I had longer reach like Dhalsim"
But I don't want no beef, your Mom's a G from Compton
Any moment she might show up at King of the Dot and get them heaters popping
So I better flee before she acts like Stephen, and brings the Hawk in
You rapped about your dad in the beginning, that's some shit I wasn't gonna say
But I'm an evil motherfucker so all that shit you were talking about, I think that shit is gay, yeah
I will fly him out of his casket and I'll slump the faggot
I'll fuck your mom in front of her and I'll (soak the mattress?)
Then I'll throw the broken prophylactic on his open casket
I will forge a stack of boarding passes, get on board a Concorde and crash it into an overpass during morning traffic

Who said that? Come on! Admit it homie!
Speak up brother! I'll go back there right now and I'll fuck your mother!

Calling fucking Organik like he fucking owes you something
Motherfucker doesn't owe you nothing
Cause you don't nothing about struggling
Look at TheSaurus and Illmac, yeah look at TheSaurus, cousin
They're battling for pride, if they lose today they're going home with nothing
But you're too much of a pussy, a battle you won't go judging
You'd rather be a fucking homo and just vote on public

Yo who the fuck is talking bro? Yo who's talking?
Aight I see you're offended because his mom is being brought up
Okay that shit is some harsh stuff
But this is battling, what you expect? This is the kind of shit that pops up
What? What, y'all fucking mad his mom is brought up?
I don't give a fuck if they have special needs they have all types of foundations to get their guap up
I don't know 'bout y'all but, I've already donated enough money from my heart into that large cup sitting at the counter in every single Starbucks
Fuck you! Don't ever fuck up my battle!
I'll pick up your bitch and I'll hump her like my camel!

[Round 3 - DNA]
Did anybody see who he was talking to? No! Me neither, so why'd y'all think that was hot y'all
Cause you looked up there for 5 seconds and talked to something unknown like a blocked call
So Diz why do you keep thinking you getting hot and gon' grip around
Me DNA, I'm in Canada my first time
? in town
Show you how I'm the illest and I'm realest with the sickest sound
He kept mentioning Hollow but it's like his battle with Hitman, cause when I pull it out I won't miss the pound
See if you really think about that, now I'm gonna try to stay calm and keep my cool B
But I've been watching King Of The Dot battles and I saw a dude that had potential we would soon see
And I don't like bringing up people that died usually, but truthfully, this faggot should've died instead of Bruce B
You're not a shot buster at Blockbuster you wouldn't move E
You dick ride and switch sides, you a groupie
I don't know that much about Canadian change but I tell y'all truthfully
I know for a 2 dollar coin he'll be on his 2 knees
So Diz, why would you even start though?
You act like you gangsta and you tough like you got the heart though
You a bitch, I'll have more whips at your house than a car show
Smoke him down just like a Marlboro, never at heart though
Since he think he street in Canada
If it's war then I'll mark him and leave his face with a scar, bro
Dizaster, I have a question: why do you rap like this?
You spit no punchlines but do all of this, why do you act like this?
See you wanna act crazy, like you could stop with this
This isn't a battle of battling this is a battle of Dizaster having battles Alcoholic Anonymous
He standing here in front of Organik, thinking that he's the rapping answer
And I bet you wish you can get a disease, so you can battle cancer
You think you're so nice so you can rap for weeks
Dizaster has insomnia on purpose so he can battle sleep
I bet your Grandma's 97 and listens to Arab Money to get a ?
You make bombs so much you wake up the car alarms
If your man's name was Puff Daddy, then you'll suck off Sean and John, I show up to your Mom's house with pepperoni on a Papa John's and take it back when she opens it and tell her "it's Ramadan"
So nigga why you acting tight? I heard the sling out here in Canada
I seen today you stayed calm, you ain't vexed
But how the hell you ever expect to be the King of the Dot? Nigga you ain't Rex
See y'all don't get how I can switch that nigga when he's next
I broke that down, King of the Dot, Dot Mobb, T-Rex
Oh see, y'all might not get that with that bar, matter of fact, uhhh that was okay when I make rhymes
But I bet you get the bar when I let off this gun and let that K Shine
Ran into his crib when I set you off with that burner shoot
And after that you get murdered and murdered even worse just like Murder Mook
So why you keep talking like you the best cuz
Now I'ma get on some other shit disconnect your body they won't find where your head was
Body over there with the (morgue?) the doctors don't know where your leg was
Your family coming trying to see you in the morgue and they don't know where his head was
Now you looking he's just a John Doe, so when his DJ goes to make a Best of
They gon' have to put a question mark in front of his name like ?uestlove
Now we here in this battle Diz, so say what you say now
If you act up then come through I'ma let off that Tre Pound
Why talk about a gun when I got dawgs on each side like Greyhound
Beat you up to the part where you can't even stay now
You won't have a Future like that nigga from 8 Mile
Run around with the (sixty?) and leave your body on the playground
They'll be nothing but your soul left, just like James Brown
Pick him up snuff him and watch me spend money online like Paypal
And he still gonna try to rhyme cause he gon' act like he's better
Dizaster you think you so tough with these bars but I really don't think you better
You can never come through and act like you fresher
I found out that his signs a crab, which means that he's a cancer and that explains why you always crack under pressure
So Diz, why you gon' act like you going when it's hot
How can you respect the nigga that disrespect the dude for making a song for his Pops
But he gon' act crazy like he fear harder
But since you mentioned my dad you reminded me of him, cause after this y'all won't see your career going farther
So why you wanna act like you step beat fast
Nigga I pop and leave, like dead beat dads
And then he wants to talk crazy like you come through and smash your men
If I could do this then Dizaster we'd fight and I'd beat up this fag again
I heard Hollohan's in jail that's all cool, I wish he could be hear to rap again
But if y'all know the Bible the only way God can come back is when the disaster end
So how you think you dumb funny? How you just say I was scared to battle for 3 stacks but then you came at Drake? That's why you got Young Money
And you never have cash when you gripping it hard, so nigga I blow your brains off, then blow your other brains off then blow your other brains off and keep changing wigs like Nicki Minaj
It doesn't make sense Diz? So why you think that you straight hotter?
If I don't know what I'm saying when I don't make sense well nigga you don't make dollars
You never had money in the rows when know I'm getting silly
If this don't make sense then how come we only battled for 750?
Now come through when you act like you crazy and you fuck with that
Tell the truth Diz, we could've battled on Smack for double that
But you tried to do it here in King of the Dot and I said that's cool I plan it
Cause you never get nothing you never act up and blam it
You're a waste of a nut you shouldn't even belong on this plannet
And truthfully you should've got fucked up by the cops instead of Organik
So why you keep acting like you so tough like you can spray shells
Awww you're yawning while I'm rapping, that's all cool 'til I spray well
You think that I can't do what you do I can do it better when I (Raylell?)
Just think of this battle with the LA initials backwards, cause that's what he's leaving with, a L
See Diz you wanna keep rapping crazy when you try to act like you flow like best
But you can't come through nigga I put a hole like chest
Now I ain't even come through to rap with it
I'mma show him how Smack and quick gone dap this bitch after that I clap the clip
He keep moving his head back until I smack it quick
You a faggot that I never come through and dap you bitch
I'll run up in your crib real too and smack it quick and shoot him while he's writing with his pen, now that's how you Arabic
And that was a half punchline, that ain't even the half of it
Now I'mma switch up and talk to this nigga in Arabic
Hedat, your family told me you're a mediac
There's a thousand words in the Arab dictionary but my favourite one is Eddifat
Ella Stasi, cause these dudes wanna keep talking with the clip but after that I'm like Pulla Misha Marka, cause that means you're a bitch
And after that I'mma say "it's getting hot in here"
And Ik Fala Watchi y'all know what that means in Arabic, Get him the fuck out of here
So why this dude acting up like he playing wit' me
Oh, you thought we was in Canada so they wouldn't say it with me?
Nigga please why you play inside, that slogan is like Boost Mobile, that shit's nationwide wide
So why you acting crazy with the best shell
These clips will make you sprint and find your body in the next (tell/town?)
Why you keep talking like you ? for sure?
Oh you know about the hotels we in? You on the 6th and I'm on the 7th floor
That's cool nigga so stay up, after I blast with the shell I hate to leave him on the elevator cause he'll be going on his way up
So you keep rhyming Diz, keep spitting all these bars when I clap ya
Acting all hard but see you not a real dude you just a actor
It doesn't matter what you say cause you're gay and you just a actor
You can't do what you do cause nigga please I'm the pastor
Break you down ? crumble you're body like Ritz crackers
Cause I got a question y'all, whats a disaster to a rapture
He can't move it on that blink screen, you so stupid you can't do what the blinks d
I kill him in fucking 7HD a HD come through turn his body soul, rip it apart and hive it looking like gangrene
Fuck up your soul have you're body looking like brinkscreen?
I'mma teach your old teacher stupid I make greenery
So after I do that when I spark fiends, shoot him in his pockets with money and you gon' see that wall green
And after I do that on a nice day, hit him with that nice Tre, then doctors and paramedics gon' be having to find the right aid
Cause I'll run up on that whip, when I'm steering now
I see that he's fearing now I clear the town
Bishop bugante ratchets I shoot it in your face and tear that mirror down
You clear the town when I'm off on the dome, cause right now please nigga please topping the dome
I come through, fuck that, like you said you always talk about popping the shone?
But after I shoot I'mma ha I'mma have to off his top like cherome
And he keep thinking he coming praising when you on that
You acting like you can freestyle and rhyme nigga like you move on that
You say that you like rhyming nerdy but I don't get it when you cool on raps
Cause every battle you have with a street rapper you talk about guns like you on Smack
So Diz how does that make sense, when it's so lovely
You said that you didn't shit on King Of The Dot and now it's so lovely
Now you gon' try here get in my face and try to punk me so let's break it down on exactly what he said about the country
Nigga who are you airing?
You just sat 6 feet tall and didn't do shit nigga who are you scaring?
Like what's wrong with this dude? I had to tell him 5 times and maybe 1 time?
Like we know, you know we both freestylers so why would you do that? So I can make a punchline?
Like I don't get it when I blam it, nw back to what I was talking 'bout with Organik
Like I said right? This dude gon' act like he's on his grown shit
When I mentioned King Of The Dot, you should've said something but since you didn't I'mma rebuttal your own shit
Like when I said you disrespected King Of The Dot and that was lovely?
Then you should've replied, well then Organik disrespected our country
And that's when I woulda told you I'm disrepectful for spitting in your face, but I got more respect for Organik cause at least he did it in our face
And you pussy, you never hold the nine and spray
Like when you said Canadians are faggots, Canadians are faggots, you did that shit miles away
So now that we here in Canada and you said they have no military, they have no healthcare, Canadians are faggots, say it again Diz
(Diz: DNA's a faggot)
No say it again Diz about Canada
(Diz: Canadians are faggots, Crowd boos)
Diz what's going on here? Things starting to change you see you're on your way now
You heard all them boos you kinda looking like me on 8 Mile
But now he acting crazy when he's popping it nice
You tried to talk about me with Eminem dropping the mic
But you think it's all cool, something something the best in?
Well you just booed same fr..front of the same presence in front of a worldwide legend
So like I said, say Canadians are faggots again.....
Reapeat that
Exactly my point (*inaudible over crowd cheers*)
Fuck is this nigga talking 'bout?
So why he keep acting crazy, acting like he all tough blamming a razor
I just came to King of the Dot and got rid of Dizaster; I'm Canada's saviour!!